# Pandemic

### Sonia Shah

1. The demise of infectious diseases in wealthy societies was an inevitable result of economic development. As societies prospered, their disease profile shifted. Instead of being plagued by contagion, they suffered primarily from slow-moving, chronic, noncommunicable conditions, like heart disease and cancer.
2. Between 1940 and 2004, more than three hundred infectious diseases either newly emerged or reemerged in places and in populations that had never seen them before.
3. Between 1980 and 2000, the number of deaths pathogens caused in the United States alone rose nearly 60 percent. HIV was responsible for a large proportion of those deaths, but not all. Excluding HIV, the number of people felled by pathogens rose by 22 percent.
4. 90 percent of epidemiologists said that a pandemic that will sicken 1 billion, kill up to 165 million, and trigger a global recession that could cost up to $3 trillion would occur sometime in the next two generations.
5. Chytrid fungus, first spotted in 1998, now threatens the collapse of many species of amphibians. In 2004, pollinating insects began disappearing, victims of the still-mysterious colony collapse disorder. In 2006, white-nose syndrome, caused by the fungal pathogen Pseudogymnoascus destructans, started to decimate North American bats.
6. it’s the backstory that is the most important one of all, for it gives us the knowledge we need to prevent pandemics from taking hold in the first place. The arrival of a spate of new pathogens provided an opportunity to capture that backstory in real time. The obscure mechanisms and pathways that turn microbes into pandemic-causing pathogens could be tracked firsthand.
7. Cholera also started out in the bodies of animals. The creatures that harbored cholera live in the sea. They’re a kind of tiny crustacean called copepods
8. Copepods encase themselves in crusty exteriors made of a polymer called chitin (pronounced “kite-in”). Several times during their lifetimes, they shed their outgrown skins like snakes, discarding 100 billion tons of carapaces annually. Vibrio bacteria feed on this abundance of chitin, collectively recycling 90 percent of the ocean’s excess chitin. Were it not for them, copepods’ mountain of exoskeletons would starve the ocean of carbon and nitrogen.
9. The basic reproductive number (also known as R0, or “R-naught,” as the Anglophiles pronounce it) describes the average number of susceptible people who are infected by a single infected person (in the absence of outside interventions).
10. If each infection results in more than one additional infection, then the afflicted population is facing an existential threat that requires immediate and urgent attention. It means that, in the absence of interventions, the outbreak will expand exponentially.
11. The basic reproductive number of a zoonotic pathogen, which cannot spread from one infected person into another, is always less than 1. But as it refines its attack on humans, its ability to spread among them improves. Once it tips over the number 1, the pathogen has crossed the threshold and broken free of its reservoir animals. It’s a bona fide human pathogen that is self-sustaining in humans.
12. Instead of extracting fluids to nourish the body’s tissues, the vibrio-colonized gut sucked water and electrolytes out of the body’s tissues and flushed them away with the waste.
13. Vibrio cholerae’s basic reproductive number, according to modern mathematical models, ranged from 2 to 6.
14. More than 60 percent of our newly emerged pathogens originate in the furred and winged creatures around us. Some of these new pathogens come from domesticated animals, such as pets and livestock. Most—over 70 percent—come from wild animals.
15. A disproportionate number of human pathogens hail from other primates, who’ve bestowed upon us 20 percent of our most burdensome pathogens (including HIV and malaria), despite comprising just 0.5 percent of all vertebrates.
16. From cows, we got measles and tuberculosis; from pigs, pertussis; from ducks, influenza.
17. It stands to reason: bats are widely distributed and resilient creatures. Of 4,600 species of mammals on earth, 20 percent are bats. And, as a study in Paraguay found, certain bat species thrive in disturbed forests in even higher abundances than in intact ones.
18. In humans, Ebola causes hemorrhagic fever and can kill 90 percent of those it infects.
19. Monkeypox is a virus that lives in Central African rodents. It comes from the same genus of viruses as the now extinct variola, the virus that caused smallpox, which killed between 300 and 500 million people over the course of the twentieth century.
20. The growing size of pig farms in Malaysia had similarly allowed a bat virus called Nipah to spill over into people.
21. As avian diversity declined in the United States, specialist species like woodpeckers and rails disappeared, while generalist species like American robins and crows boomed. (Populations of American robins have grown by 50 to 100 percent over the past twenty-five years.)48 This reordering of the composition of the local bird population steadily increased the chances that the virus would reach a high enough concentration to spill over into humans. At some point, a threshold was crossed.
22. The tickborne bacteria Borrelia burgdorferi first emerged in humans in an outbreak in Old Lyme, Connecticut, in the late 1970s. If left untreated, the disease it caused—Lyme disease—can lead to paralysis and arthritis among other woes.
23. Between 2001 and 2008, cases of tickborne Babesia microti, which causes a malaria-like illness, increased twentyfold.
24. Globally, 12 percent of bird species, 23 percent of mammals, and 32 percent of amphibians are at risk of extinction. Since 1970, global populations of these creatures have declined by nearly 30 percent.
25. A University of Iowa study found that 3 percent of meat samples collected from Iowa grocery stores carried MRSA. In the Netherlands, the strain of MRSA commonly found among pigs causes 20 percent of MRSA infections in humans.
26. ships, besides being watertight and making water
27. (Contact-transmission pathogens like Ebola are much better suited to take advantage of practices like burial rituals, in which people ceremonially bathe infected corpses, and health-care settings in which clinicians extensively handle infected patients, both of which played important roles in fueling the 2014 Ebola outbreak.)
28. Every year, for example, hundreds of thousands of so-called medical tourists from the United States, Europe, the Middle East, and elsewhere fly to countries such as India to undergo surgery. Thanks to market reforms in the early 1990s, which unleashed several decades of 8 percent annual growth in the Indian economy, modern private hospitals in India now provide the same standard of care as Western hospitals.
29. most bacteria in Indian hospitals are gram-negative, which means they are encased in tough outer membranes that make them more resistant to antibiotics and antiseptics than the gram-positive strains that dominate in Western hospitals.
30. Compared to about 20 percent of hospital infections in the United States, more than half of hospital infections in India are resistant to common antibiotics.
31. A particularly pernicious pathogen called New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1) has been present in New Delhi since at least 2006. It’s actually a fragment of DNA called a plasmid, which can spread between bacterial species. What makes it dangerous is that it endows bacteria with the ability to resist fourteen classes of antibiotics, including the powerful intravenous antibiotics administered solely in hospitals as a last resort in patients who have failed to respond to all other treatment options. When NDM-1 inserts itself into a bacterial pathogen, in other words, it makes that strain nearly untreatable. Only two imperfect drugs can contain NDM-1 infections: an older antibiotic called colistin, which fell into disuse in the 1980s because of its toxicity, and an expensive IV antibiotic called tigecycline, which is currently approved only for soft-tissue infections.
32. Global distribution is a prerequisite of pandemics, but it’s not a sufficient condition on its own. Pathogens, even if ubiquitous, can cause pandemics only if they encounter the right transmission opportunities wherever they land. A widely distributed pathogen, deprived of such opportunities, is as harmless as a defanged snake.
33. And pathogens’ reliance on specific modes of transmission is not particularly flexible. Once adapted to a certain mode of transmission, pathogens cannot easily alter the complex machinery they’ve evolved in order to jump from victim to victim. That’s why, historically, mosquitoborne pathogens don’t evolve to become waterborne ones, and waterborne ones don’t evolve to become airborne ones.
34. For pathogens, excreta is a perfect vehicle for spreading from one person to another. Human feces, freshly emerged from the body, teems with bacteria and viruses. By weight, nearly 10 percent is composed of bacteria, and in each gram there might be up to one billion viral particles. Every year, a typical human produces 13 gallons of the stuff (plus 130 gallons of sterile urine), creating a microbe-rich river of waste
35. About a third of the bacterial contamination in U.S. waterways originates in dog waste, and such contamination is more common in residential areas where dogs live than in commercial areas. (Scientists call this phenomenon the “Fido Hypothesis.”)50 It’s in the air, too. One study of outdoor air pollution in Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit found that during the winter when trees are leafless (and therefore not exuding bacteria into the air), the majority of the aerosolized bacteria comes from dog feces.
36. But far from being a harmless source of fertilizer, dog feces is both an environmental contaminant (and is classified as such by the Environmental Protection Agency) and a source of pathogens that can infect people. Like human excreta, dog poo teems with pathogenic microbes, such as strains of E. coli, roundworms, and other parasites. One of the most common parasitic infections in Americans is the result of their exposure to dog feces. The dog roundworm Toxocara canis is common in dogs and, because of the ubiquity of dog feces, widespread in the environment. It can contaminate soil and water for years. Kids pick up the parasite when they play in contaminated soil and inadvertently put their hands in their mouths. Although it’s rarely diagnosed, since there’s no easily available, effective diagnostic test for it, one recent survey found that 14 percent of Americans over the age of six were infected. In humans, Toxocara canis has been linked to asthma and a range of neurological effects.52 Dogs can also carry the tapeworm Echinococcus multilocularis, which in humans causes a disease that resembles liver cancer. The infection is a growing problem in Switzerland, Alaska, and parts of China
37. livestock produce thirteen times more solid waste than the human population does in the United States.55 To cope with the tens of millions of gallons of excreta they produce, farmers mix it with water and then pump it into untreated, multi-acre cesspools (“manure lagoons”). This wastewater is sprayed on crops, but since local croplands can’t absorb it all, it leaches into the groundwater and runs off into the surface waters. It also creates a plume of odor and a fine mist of polluted water that blankets the drying laundry, cars, and homes of those living downwind of the farms.
38. Shiga toxin–producing E. coli, or STEC, is one. About half of all cattle on American feedlots are infected with the microbe, which can survive in the environment for weeks or even longer if the weather is cool. In humans, STEC causes bloody diarrhea and life-threatening complications including hemolytic uremic syndrome, in which the kidneys fail. Up to 5 percent perish, and a third of those who survive suffer lifelong kidney problems. Since the first reported outbreak in 1982, STEC has struck in fifty countries around the world. Despite ongoing efforts to contain it, each year, STEC will infect seventy thousand Americans. Those who live in countries where industrial cattle farming is common, such as in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Japan, are most at risk, and the closer you live to a cattle farm, the higher the risk.58 But the risk extends far beyond farm areas, as feces-contaminated products get shipped and consumed all over the world. In 2011, a batch of fenugreek seeds in Egypt caused an outbreak of disease three thousand miles away in Germany. That outbreak was noteworthy for two reasons. It showed the long reach of fecal-contaminated products and how they pose a risk to everyone along the global food chain. It also showed how pathogens exploit fecally contaminated environments not only for their transmission opportunities but also to become more virulent. This latter enterprise has to do with how microbes exchange genetic material. Unlike creatures like us, who exchange genes “vertically,” from parents to children, microbes can exchange genes laterally, by bumping up against each other. Scientists call it “horizontal gene transfer.” Since it happens in places where microbes meet, microbe-rich, fecally contaminated environments provide a conducive setting.59 This has allowed many pathogens to become more virulent. Horizontal gene transfer is the process by which cholera turned into a pandemic killer, when a bacteriophage (a virus that infects bacteria) bumped up against the vibrio, endowing it with the ability to secrete toxin. Horizontal gene transfer created MRSA, when Staphylococcus aureus acquired the ability to secrete a toxin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin from another virus, along with genes that allow it to resist antibiotics from related bacterial species. It’s the process by which the NDM-1 plasmid moves between bacterial species, endowing them with its powerful drug-resisting capacities.60 The pathogen that caused the 2011 outbreak in Germany had gained its virulence through two horizontal gene transfers. First, a bacteriophage infected a harmless strain of E. coli, endowing it with the genes to secrete the Shiga toxin, creating STEC. A second horizontal gene transfer endowed the pathogen with the ability to secrete even more toxins and to resist a broad range of antibiotics. The result was an especially virulent strain of STEC called O104:H4, which triggers life-threatening complications in twice as many victims as regular STEC.61 Sometime before 2011, the pathogen spread onto the fenugreek farm in Egypt, migrating deep into the seeds’ interior, where it could hide from the disinfecting solutions that farmers use before planting.62 Fifty different companies in Germany bought sixteen tons of the invisibly contaminated seeds and sold them to gardeners and farmers across the country to grow into sprouts. In the spring of 2011, when people in and around the city of Hamburg ate the sprouts sprinkled on salads and crudités, O104:H4 slid into their bodies.63 Scores started pouring into clinics and hospitals, confused and unable to speak
39. Shiga toxin–producing E. coli, or STEC, is one. About half of all cattle on American feedlots are infected with the microbe, which can survive in the environment for weeks or even longer if the weather is cool. In humans, STEC causes bloody diarrhea and life-threatening complications including hemolytic uremic syndrome, in which the kidneys fail. Up to 5 percent perish, and a third of those who survive suffer lifelong kidney problems.
40. Unlike creatures like us, who exchange genes “vertically,” from parents to children, microbes can exchange genes laterally, by bumping up against each other. Scientists call it “horizontal gene transfer.” Since it happens in places where microbes meet, microbe-rich, fecally contaminated environments provide a conducive setting.
41. Horizontal gene transfer is the process by which cholera turned into a pandemic killer, when a bacteriophage (a virus that infects bacteria) bumped up against the vibrio, endowing it with the ability to secrete toxin. Horizontal gene transfer created MRSA, when Staphylococcus aureus acquired the ability to secrete a toxin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin from another virus, along with genes that allow it to resist antibiotics from related bacterial species. It’s the process by which the NDM-1 plasmid moves between bacterial species, endowing them with its powerful drug-resisting capacities.
42. Shiga toxin, creating STEC. A second horizontal gene transfer endowed the pathogen with the ability to secrete even more toxins and to resist a broad range of antibiotics. The result was an especially virulent strain of STEC called O104:H4, which triggers life-threatening complications in twice as many victims as regular STEC.61 Sometime before 2011, the pathogen spread onto the fenugreek farm in Egypt, migrating deep into the seeds’ interior, where it could hide from the disinfecting solutions that farmers use before planting.62 Fifty different companies in Germany bought sixteen tons of the invisibly contaminated seeds and sold them to gardeners and farmers across the country to grow into sprouts. In the spring of 2011, when people in and around the city of Hamburg ate the sprouts sprinkled on salads and crudités, O104:H4 slid into their bodies.63 Scores started pouring into clinics and hospitals, confused and unable to speak clearly. Their “awareness becomes blurred, they have
43. Nearly 2 million die every year from diarrhea and scores of others from diseases such as intestinal worms, the helminthic infection schistosomiasis, and blindness-causing trachoma, which sanitary waste disposal systems could prevent.
44. The lack of adequate sanitation in New Delhi similarly allowed NDM-1 bacteria to make their way into local waters. A 2010 study found NDM-1-endowed bacteria in 4 percent of samples collected from drinking-water supplies and 51 of 171 samples collected from puddles in streets and alleys.72 Whether local people have contracted NDM-1 bacteria from contaminated waters in India is unknown, but it’s plausible.
45. “viable but nonculturable” state, a kind of suspended animation in which its cells shrink and stop replicating, biding their time until conditions improve. (Pathogenic bacteria in cow’s milk and bacteria in wastewater retreat into such states when faced with the assault of pasteurization and chlorination, respectively.)
46. By 2030, experts estimate, that will change. The majority of humankind will live in large cities.27 Only a handful of these large metropolises will be as healthful and well regulated as the cities of Europe and North America. Many will be more like Mumbai. Two billion of us will live in slums like Dharavi.28 Our booming livestock population, which is larger today than the cumulative population of the last ten thousand years of domestication until 1960, live in the animal equivalent of slums, too. More than half of the world’s pigs and chickens are raised on factory farms, and more than 40 percent of the world’s beef is produced on feedlots, where animals are crowded together by the millions.
47. This reliance on social contact makes virulence problematic for such pathogens. If they are highly virulent, their victims will sicken and perhaps even die. Infected people will end up alone in bed or isolated in hospital wards rather than at work shaking people’s hands or on the train breathing on other passengers. When infected victims die, their bodies will be abandoned, burned, or buried—possibly before the pathogens lurking inside can spread to anyone else. This is a serious disadvantage. And it’s why highly virulent strains are more likely than less virulent ones to die out. Virulence is evolutionarily constrained.
48. killers like cholera; Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis; and variola, which causes smallpox. Virulence doesn’t handicap their ability to spread, because they can spread from their dead victims by persisting in the environment until another live victim picks them up. The same is true for vectorborne pathogens like Plasmodium falciparum, which causes malaria. So long as mosquitoes keep biting, the pathogens continue to spread, no matter how sick their victims become. (On the contrary, virulence might even improve their transmissibility, since sicker, bedridden victims may be more likely to get bitten by mosquitoes compared to less ill ones.)
49. Pathogens that spread through social contact are usually destined to be relatively mild. Crowds allow even these pathogens to become killers.
50. Influenza viruses originate in wild waterfowl and have long spilled over and adapted to other species, including humans. There are three types. Type B and type C influenza viruses are human-adapted pathogens, which cause mild seasonal flu. Type A are those viruses that have remained in their original reservoirs: ducks, geese, swans, gulls, terns, and waders.
51. Occasionally, type A viruses spill over into domesticated poultry flocks. It’s especially common in southern China, where traditional farming practices allow domesticated ducks and wild waterfowl to easily mingle, providing ample opportunities for influenza to spread into the domesticated flocks. But the domesticated birds, unlike the wild ones, have no immunity to flu viruses. The pathogen replicates with abandon in their bodies, evolving new, more deadly strains called “highly pathogenic avian influenza” or HPAI.
52. According to mathematical models, the basic reproductive number of avian influenza viruses, in places where poultry farming is intense, is more than 10.
53. in 1996, a wild bird flu crossed over into domesticated geese on a small farm in Guangdong province, one of the largest poultry-producing regions in China.48 The virus, dubbed “H5N1,” evolved two never-before-seen capacities. Unlike other avian influenzas, which were rarely found in wild birds, this virus struck a wide variety of wild species, including migratory ones. It also could infect humans.
54. People were exposed to H5N1 through close contact with infected birds. Normal flu symptoms would turn into severe pneumonia, and for some, organ failure. More than half—59 percent—of those infected perished.50 And the virus spread. The international poultry trade carried H5N1 into poultry flocks in at least eight countries, including Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Cambodia.51 Migratory birds ferried H5N1 into the Middle East and Europe.
55. Every year seasonal influenza kills up to half a million people around the world. That’s the toll of flu viruses that have already adapted to us, and we to them. A novel influenza virus that could spread as well as the seasonal flu with an even marginally higher mortality rate could level millions.
56. H5N1 is a zoonotic pathogen.
57. But as it evolves, H5N1’s transmissibility in humans could improve. So far, the virus has evolved into at least ten distinct lineages, or “clades,” all with varying abilities and proclivities.55 Some have already mutated in ways that scientists think could boost the effectiveness of H5N1’s transmission in humans. A distinct clade in Egypt, for example, appears better than any other at binding with human cells. That is probably why, between 2009 and 2013, more than half of those who sickened with H5N1 came from Egypt.
58. One of the biological barriers to the spread of bird influenzas in humans is the fact that bird-adapted viruses bind to sialic acids in birds that are not present in humans.
59. Theoretically, H5N1 or some other bird-adapted virus could spontaneously mutate in such a way that allows it to bind to human sialic acids. But there’s another, much faster way for novel flu viruses to acquire that ability, through what’s called reassortment. This is when a virus acquires a chunk of new genes from another virus, and with the newly acquired genes, all of the capabilities those new genes confer. An avian influenza virus could reassort with one that was already good at infecting people, for example one of the many influenza viruses already adapted to humans, such as the relatively mild ones that cause seasonal flu. Then the novel avian influenza virus could acquire the ability to transmit efficiently in humans, too.
60. Reassortment of this kind could happen only in cells coinfected with both viruses at the same time.
61. Pigs have both humanlike sialic acids on the surfaces of their cells as well as avian-like ones. That means that both kinds of virus can bind to their cells. (This is also true of quails, but given the small scale of quail farming does not seem to play much of a role in the epidemiology of influenza.) Pigs living in proximity to both humans and poultry flocks or wild waterfowl could be the mysterious missing link between bird viruses and human influenza pandemics. Virologists call them the perfect “mixing vessel” for novel influenza strains.
62. A variant of H3N2, a virus that normally infects pigs, started spreading into people in the United States in the summer of 2012.
63. (Scientists categorize influenza viruses by the type of proteins on their surfaces. Each has one of sixteen subtypes of the protein hemagglutinin (H) and one of nine subtypes of the enzyme neuraminidase (N) on its surface.)
64. collective defenses of even the most crude sort—isolating the sick and warning each other of a disease’s spread, say—can act like an underwater barrier, breaking the wave of death and destruction.
65. Of the one hundred largest economies in the world, only forty-nine are countries; fifty-one are private corporations.60 By 2016, the richest 1 percent of people in the world will control more than half of the planet’s total wealth.
66. By 2009, the people and animals of the United States were consuming upward of 35 million pounds of antibiotics annually.
67. There are few new drugs on the horizon. Since antibiotics are not used for very long, there’s little market incentive for drug companies to develop new ones. The market value of a brand-new antibiotic is just $50 million, a paltry sum for a drug company considering the research and development costs incurred to create such drugs. As a result, between 1998 and 2008, the FDA approved just thirteen new antibiotics, only three of which boasted new mechanisms of action.79 In 2009, according to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, only sixteen of the hundreds of new drugs in development were antibiotics. None targeted the most resistant and least treatable gram-negative bacteria, like those endowed with NDM-1.
68. By making a voluntary contribution, individual donors buy control at the WHO. They can bypass the WHO’s priorities and allot the money for whatever specific purpose they like.
69. according to an analysis of the agency’s 2004–2005 budget, 91 percent of the WHO’s voluntary contributions were earmarked for diseases that account for just 8 percent of global mortality.
70. Powerlessness and complicity, he says, are uncomfortable feelings that people naturally seek to expunge or escape, and one way to do that is to project them onto others. When those others are punished, the old feelings of powerlessness and guilt are transformed into feelings of mastery or even “piety and self-righteous indignation.”
71. As deadly as cholera is, its tenure in the body is really more like a visit from an unpleasantly demanding guest than a murderous assailant. What kills is the dehydration the vibrio causes while replicating in the gut. That means that surviving cholera requires solely that we replenish the fluids it sucks dry. The cure for cholera is clean water, plus a smattering of simple electrolytes like salts. This elementary treatment reduces cholera mortality from 50 percent to less than 1 percent. Preventing cholera by separating human waste from drinking-water supplies was similarly well within the reach of nineteenth-century technology. The aqueducts and reservoirs of the ancients could have done it.
72. The number of available facts and questions that can be asked is potentially infinite. Without a sense of why something might occur the way it does, he observed, there’s no way for scientists to know which questions to ask or which facts to collect. There’s no way to get to the “how” questions that underlie most scientific activity.
73. But as useful as paradigms are, they also create subversive dilemmas for scientists. Paradigms create expectations, and expectations limit scientists’ perceptions. Psychologists have described two common cognitive snags that occur: “confirmation bias” and “change blindness.” The problem of confirmation bias is that people selectively notice and remember only the subset of evidence that supports their expectations. They see what they expect to see. They also fail to notice anomalies that contradict their expectations, which is “change blindness.”
74. “To be accepted as a paradigm, a theory must seem better than its competitors, but it need not, and in fact never does, explain all the facts with which it can be confronted.”
75. specific role these microbes played in animal diseases. The French chemist Louis Pasteur discovered the microbial culprit behind a disease of silkworms in 1870; the German microbiologist Robert Koch discovered that Bacillus anthracis caused anthrax in 1876.
76. Today, a saline solution mixed with a bit of lactate, potassium, and calcium is an antidote to cholera as effective as a shot of insulin to a patient in a diabetic coma. Oral rehydration therapy, by simply and quickly curing cholera and other diarrheal diseases, is considered one of the most important medical advances of the twentieth century.
77. Even simpler methods pioneered by the microbiologist Rita Colwell and her colleagues, such as filtering untreated water through a few layers of sari cloth, catches 90 percent of the vibrio bacteria in contaminated water, reducing cholera infections by 50 percent.
78. For one thing, even when scientists devise new cures, we are not necessarily able to produce them at the right scale and at the right time. Drug development is slow and constrained by the economic concerns of the for-profit pharmaceutical industry. If the market for a new drug is modest, it doesn’t matter how big the public-health need for it is, or how solid the scientific evidence supporting its effectiveness: that drug is unlikely to get to market.
79. Today, the most cutting-edge drugs available for the disease are based on a botanical compound called artemisinin, a two-thousand-year-old Chinese remedy.
80. Modern medicine’s reductionist approach is the exact opposite of Hippocratic medicine’s approach, which was fundamentally holistic and interdisciplinary, and called upon a range of expertise to elucidate disease processes, from engineering and geography to architecture and the law.
81. Less than a quarter of HIV patients ask their vets about the health risks posed to them by their pets. These risks include salmonella (carried by turtles and other reptiles), MRSA (carried by dogs and cats), and, before the importation of African rodents was banned in 2003, monkeypox from pet prairie dogs.
82. But in addition to fueling the population growth, urbanization, and mobility that contribute to pandemics, the global bonfire of fossil fuels will heighten the likelihood of pandemics on its own, in a way that is likely to be even more consequential than all of its contributing factors put together.
83. In fact, cholera hadn’t disappeared in 1926, exactly. The particular strain that had ravaged the world in six pandemics—now known as “classical 01” Vibrio cholerae—had died out. But before vanishing it had spawned a sneaky little descendant, one particularly well suited to exploiting new opportunities presented by the changing sea it lived in. This new kind of cholera vibrio could thrive in rivers, estuaries, lakes, and ponds at least three times longer than classical 01.11 It was a peculiarly resilient creature, able to withstand an onslaught of antibiotics, too.
84. Climate change had rendered the seas increasingly warm, and vibrio infections rose around the world, not just in Haiti. In the warming North Sea and Baltic Sea, vibrio infections soared.38 In the United States between 2006 and 2008, vibrio infections grew by 43 percent. Pathogenic vibrio had spread into places they’d never been problematic before, like Alaska and Chile and Iceland, infesting shellfish and threatening those who eat it.
85. Odd weather combinations shape outbreaks of infectious disease in unpredictable ways. It was a cold snap in winter that led wild mute swans to alter their migration patterns in 2006 and ferry H5N1 into more than twenty European countries.41 It was a mild winter in 1999 that allowed mosquitoes to breed in the sewers of New York City all season, followed by a summer drought, which forced thirsty birds to congregate in crowded watering holes, leading to the city’s first West Nile virus outbreak.
86. mosquitoes to breed in the sewers of New York City all season, followed by a summer drought, which forced thirsty birds to congregate in crowded watering holes, leading to the city’s first West Nile virus outbreak.42 Clearly environmental conditions shaped these outbreaks, but could anyone have predicted just how? Consider an environmentally sensitive pathogen like Plasmodium falciparum, which causes mosquitoborne malaria. More rainfall can lead to more malaria—since it creates puddles and ponds that malaria-carrying mosquitoes breed in—or less, since runoff and floodwaters wash mosquito eggs away. Similarly, droughts can lead to more malaria by turning rivers into stagnant, mosquito-friendly ponds—or less malaria, since dry weather desiccates mosquitoes’ bodies. Still, certain correlations between weather and infectious disease are clear. The heaviest rainfalls (those in the top 20 percent) preceded 68 percent of the outbreaks of waterborne diseases that occurred between 1948 and 1994 in the United States.43 Cases of West Nile virus rise by 33 percent after heavy rainfall.44 And scientists agree that warmer temperatures will expand the range for the kinds of creatures that bring us diseases: bats, mosquitoes, and ticks among them.45 It’s already started. In Costa Rica, certain bat species have moved into higher-than-normal elevations, and in North America they have expanded their wintering ranges to the north.46 The mosquito carrier of yellow fever and dengue, Aedes aegypti, long restricted to the southeastern Gulf states, popped up in California in 2013.47 The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, spread northward and into higher latitudes in Italy.48 Ticks have expanded northward and into higher latitudes in northern Europe and the eastern United States.
87. Consider an environmentally sensitive pathogen like Plasmodium falciparum, which causes mosquitoborne malaria. More rainfall can lead to more malaria—since it creates puddles and ponds that malaria-carrying mosquitoes breed in—or less, since runoff and floodwaters wash mosquito eggs away. Similarly, droughts can lead to more malaria by turning rivers into stagnant, mosquito-friendly ponds—or less malaria, since dry weather desiccates mosquitoes’ bodies.
88. Consider an environmentally sensitive pathogen like Plasmodium falciparum, which causes mosquitoborne malaria. More rainfall can lead to more malaria—since it creates puddles and ponds that malaria-carrying mosquitoes breed in—or less, since runoff and floodwaters wash mosquito eggs away. Similarly, droughts can lead to more malaria by turning rivers into stagnant, mosquito-friendly ponds—or less malaria, since dry weather desiccates mosquitoes’ bodies.
89. The heaviest rainfalls (those in the top 20 percent) preceded 68 percent of the outbreaks of waterborne diseases that occurred between 1948 and 1994 in the United States.43 Cases of West Nile virus rise by 33 percent after heavy rainfall.
90. The heaviest rainfalls (those in the top 20 percent) preceded 68 percent of the outbreaks of waterborne diseases that occurred between 1948 and 1994 in the United States.43 Cases of West Nile virus rise by 33 percent after heavy rainfall.
91. And scientists agree that warmer temperatures will expand the range for the kinds of creatures that bring us diseases: bats, mosquitoes, and ticks among them.
92. And scientists agree that warmer temperatures will expand the range for the kinds of creatures that bring us diseases: bats, mosquitoes, and ticks among them.
93. In Costa Rica, certain bat species have moved into higher-than-normal elevations, and in North America they have expanded their wintering ranges to the north.46 The mosquito carrier of yellow fever and dengue, Aedes aegypti, long restricted to the southeastern Gulf states, popped up in California in 2013.47 The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, spread northward and into higher latitudes in Italy.48 Ticks have expanded northward and into higher latitudes in northern Europe and the eastern United States.49 Warmer
94. In Costa Rica, certain bat species have moved into higher-than-normal elevations, and in North America they have expanded their wintering ranges to the north.46 The mosquito carrier of yellow fever and dengue, Aedes aegypti, long restricted to the southeastern Gulf states, popped up in California in 2013.47 The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, spread northward and into higher latitudes in Italy.48 Ticks have expanded northward and into higher latitudes in northern Europe and the eastern United States.
95. Warmer weather makes life easier for these disease vectors. It can speed up their life cycles, too. Bark beetles destroy the tissues of trees by laying their eggs in tunnels under their bark. In warmer weather, the beetles can switch from a two-year life cycle to a one-year life cycle. Since the late 1990s, the beetles have been attacking increasingly younger trees and a wider range of species of trees, decimating nearly 30 billion conifers from Alaska to Mexico. In some states, like Wyoming and Colorado, one hundred thousand lodgepole pine trees decimated by beetles fall every single day.
96. A climatically sped-up life cycle may be one reason why. Other pathogens can similarly accelerate their cycles. Malaria parasites can cut days off their developmental cycle when the ambient temperature rises. That makes it more likely that they’ll develop into infective forms within the short life span of their mosquito carriers.
97. Simply by altering the distribution of pathogens, climate shifts will increase the burden of disease, as populations are exposed to new pathogens to which they lack immunity.
98. Fungi can be potent pathogens. Unlike viruses, which require living cells to survive, fungi can persist even after all their hosts are dead because they feed on dead and decayed organic material. They also can survive independently in the environment in the form of highly durable spores.
99. Some, such as Phythophthora infestans, which caused famine-producing potato blight, changed the course of human history. Others, such as the bat scourge Pseudogymnoascus destructans and the amphibian-plaguing chytrid fungus, have brought whole species to the brink of extinction.
100. Unlike the reptiles, plants, and insects that regularly fall prey to fungal pathogens, mammals keep their blood at a scorching temperature—more than 35° above Earth’s average ambient temperature of 61° Fahrenheit—regardless of the weather around us. Most fungi, adapted to environmental temperatures, can’t take the heat of our blood and perish in our oven-like bodies.
101. The cold-blooded lifestyle is far more efficient than ours. Warm-bloodedness requires mammals to consume ten times more daily calories than we’d have to if we were cold-blooded.
102. The problem is that our warm blood repels fungal pathogens only because its temperature diverges from the ambient temperature around us, to which fungi are accustomed. If fungal pathogens evolved to tolerate higher temperatures, that gradient would disappear. It is technically possible: in lab experiments, fungi that usually perish at temperatures above 82° Fahrenheit can be bred to tolerate temperatures up to 98°. Climate change could produce the same result, on a planetwide scale, slowly but inexorably training fungi to tolerate increasing temperatures, including, at some point, the heat of our blood.
103. As the global temperature rises, fungal pathogens have already started to creep into the infectious-disease landscape. In California and Arizona, the soil-dwelling fungus Coccidioides immitis and C. posadasii caused seven times more human infections—dubbed “Valley Fever”—in 2009 than in 1997.
104. Disease is intrinsic to the fundamental relationship between microbes and their hosts.
105. Microbes colonized our skin and the lining of our guts. They incorporated their genes into ours. Our bodies were soon home to 100 trillion microbial cells, more than ten times the number of human cells; one-third of our genomes were spiked with genes that originated in bacteria.
106. Sustaining this battle readiness against microbes wouldn’t have been easy. Anytime our immune system was activated, we needed to consume more oxygen.
107. We call these culprits “pathogens,” but really they are just microbes doing the same thing they do everywhere else: feeding, growing, and spreading. And they do so relentlessly. That’s their nature. Under optimal conditions, microbes double their numbers every half hour. They never age. So long as there’s enough food around, they won’t die unless something kills them. That is to say, they will predictably exploit the resources available to them to the fullest extent possible. If that results in epidemics and pandemics, so be it.
108. According to the selfish gene theory, all of evolution can be boiled down to their machinations. Some genes, by dictating or “coding” for traits that help them spread more widely, become dominant. Others, which code for traits that are useless or harmful to their own dissemination, die out.
109. It was Hamilton who offered a startling explanation that solved the mystery: sex evolved, he said, because of pathogens. Sexual reproduction requires a profound genetic sacrifice, he noted, but the payback is that the offspring of sexual reproducers are genetically distinct from their parents. That was no big advantage in surviving hostile weather or predators, Hamilton observed, but it was a huge advantage in surviving pathogens. That’s because pathogens, unlike the weather or predators, refine their attacks upon us.
110. Since Hamilton first articulated his theory about pathogens and the evolution of sex, a large body of supportive evidence has accumulated. Biologists have found that species that practice both sexual and nonsexual reproduction will switch between the two depending on the presence of pathogens. When raised in a lab devoid of their usual pathogens, or in the presence of pathogens that are altered in such a way that they cannot evolve, the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans will mostly replicate without sex. But when stalked by pathogens, it will reproduce sexually instead. In other experiments, scientists altered roundworms so that they cannot sexually reproduce. When they reared these worms with pathogens, the nematodes went extinct within twenty generations. In contrast, when they allowed roundworms to practice sexual reproduction, they survived alongside their pathogens indefinitely. Withstanding pathogens seems to require the special benefits provided by sexual reproduction.
111. (What we really mean is what biologists call “senescence,” a gradual deterioration of function that proceeds with the passing of time and ultimately leads to death.)
112. But senescence and death are not inevitable facets of life. There are examples of immortality all around us. Microbes live forever. Trees don’t deteriorate with time. On the contrary, as they age they get stronger and more fertile. For microbes and many plants, immortality is the rule, not the exception. There are even some animals that don’t age: clams and lobsters, for example. Death, for them, is caused solely by external factors, not internal ones.
113. Scientists have found that far from being an inherently inevitable process, senescence is controlled by particular genes, variously called “suicide genes” or “death genes.” Their job is to progressively turn off the processes of self-repair that keep our bodies in good condition. They’re like a host switching off the lights at the end of a party. It happens at a certain time, no matter what.
114. Genes that control inflammation may protect us from wounds and infections when we’re young, but then go suicidal and start attacking healthy cells. The conditions that trigger these abrupt about-faces have yet to be pinpointed, but for obvious reasons they are the focus of much zealously followed research conducted by antiaging scientists.
115. Immortality undoubtedly has its perks, but there are also significant drawbacks. One is that immortal species tend to rapidly expand their numbers to the limits of whatever resources are available in the environment. That leaves them vulnerable to catastrophic events, like famines and pandemics, which can strike them in one fell swoop, killing everyone all at once.
116. The adaptive theory of aging posits that this was the context in which suicide genes evolved. The scenario would have gone something like this. Imagine two competing groups of sexually reproducing organisms. In one group, all are immortal. In the other, suicide genes have emerged and so some individuals slowly age and die. The first group is like a dense forest; the second is like a regularly culled one. When the pandemic arrives, the former group will fare as poorly as the dense forest does in a forest fire. The latter group will be more likely to survive, allowing suicide genes to spread. Suicide genes obviously don’t protect us entirely from the risk of famine and pandemic. But because individuals in our groups regularly age and die, “a little bit at a time,” as the antiaging researcher Joshua Mitteldorf puts it, the risk that those events will cause an extinction is much lower. We age and die, Mitteldorf contends, as a sacrifice to pandemics.
117. Both Hamilton’s theory about the evolution of sex and the adaptive theory of aging are versions of what’s called the “Red Queen Hypothesis,” which has revolutionized modern biology.
118. According to classic natural selection theory, as articulated in 1859 by Charles Darwin and as taught in high school biology classes around the world, pathogens and their victims adapt to each other over time, evolving toward a less fractious relationship. The Red Queen Hypothesis says otherwise. For every adaptation on the part of one species, it holds, there’s a counteradaptation on the part of its rival. What that means is that pathogens and their victims don’t evolve toward greater harmony: they evolve increasingly sophisticated attacks on each other. They’re like spouses in a bad marriage. They run “very fast and for a long time,” but they don’t “get to somewhere else.”
119. And that leads to the same conclusion as arguments about the nature of microbes and the immune system and the evolution of sex and death. That is, that the relationship between pathogens and their victims does not evolve toward greater accommodation. On the contrary, it’s a continuous battle in which each side evolves increasingly more sophisticated ways to crack the other’s defenses. This suggests that epidemics are not necessarily contingent on specific historic conditions at all. Even in the absence of canals and planes and slums and factory farms, pathogens and their hosts are locked in an endless cycle of epidemics. Far from being historical anomalies, epidemics are a natural feature of life in a microbial world.
120. And yet, when geneticists zoom in to one part of the genome, they find a singular anomaly. It’s the part of the genome where certain pathogen-recognition genes lie. These genes provide instructions for building what are called human leukocyte antigens (HLA), proteins that signal to the immune system when a cell has been infected. (They do this by binding to a fragment of the pathogen and displaying it on the surface of the cell, like a flag.) On this one part of the genome, we’ve maintained a huge number of variants among us. Our HLA or pathogen-recognition genes are more diverse, in fact, than any other part of the genome, by two orders of magnitude. So far, more than twelve thousand variants have been discovered.
121. To cause repeated epidemics in the same population, a pathogen must switch between different strains to evade detection, like a thief using different disguises to repeatedly rob the same bank. Retaining a large number of pathogen-detection genes among us ensures that there’ll always be a few individuals who can suss out the latest disguise. Each pathogen-detection gene variant thus neither fully dies out nor sweeps into dominance. We carry them around with us, like a treasure chest full of specialized detection tools handed down from generation to generation.
122. We have a lot of old genes in our genomes, genes for useful traits like eyes and brains and backbones, which we share with other species. Our pathogen-recognition genes are on par with these. Some of the pathogen-recognition genes embedded in modern people’s genomes are 30 million years old. They’ve survived among us even as we’ve split off into different species multiple times. That suggests that pathogens have been cyclically causing epidemics, dying down, then lashing out again for geological eons.
123. Indeed, according to fossil evidence, the first upright, walking hominid species, Homo erectus, diverged from their predecessors, the ape-like Australopithecus, right around the time when New5Gc was lost. If Varki is right, our first pandemic helped make us human.
124. Scientists discovered the diversity in our pathogen-recognition genes in the course of attempting organ transplants. Unless the donor and recipient shared identical pathogen-recognizing HLA genes, surgeons found, the recipient’s immune system would attack the donor’s organ as if it were pathogenic. Attempts to match donors and recipients according to their HLA genes slowly revealed the vast scale of variation among us.
125. Ancient epidemics led to the development of our heightened immune responses. These now predispose us to a range of ills, including spontaneous abortions. Five percent of all women experience recurrent, spontaneous abortions due to immunological reasons: in one way or another, the mother’s immune system, spuriously sensing a foreign intruder, attacks the fetus.
126. Our heightened immune responses, in particular those we developed to survive the ancient pandemic that Varki discovered, may predispose us to developing cancer, diabetes, and heart disease if we consume red meat. Red meat, being the flesh of mammals, is rich in Neu5Gc, the sialic acid we lost. Consuming it may trigger the same kind of immune reaction in us that mating with Australopithecus did among our ancestors 2 million years ago.
127. Genetic variants that helped us survive pathogens in the past now burden us with heightened risks of contracting other diseases and conditions. The most famous is the sickle-cell gene, which deforms red blood cells. This gene spread among people in sub-Saharan Africa who suffered malaria epidemics because it slashed the death rate from that disease.
128. Similarly, the gene that helped Africans survive sleeping sickness now puts them at risk of kidney disease, which may explain the high rates of kidney disease in African Americans today.23 Genetic changes that helped people survive malaria made them more susceptible to other pathogens such as cholera.24 The genetic mutation that allowed people to survive leprosy, which is present in 70 percent of modern Europeans, is now associated with inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Other genetic mutations, which bestowed on Europeans greater protection against bacterial infections, simultaneously damaged their ability to digest gluten. The result is celiac disease, which afflicts up to 2 percent of European populations today.
129. Genes that studded our red blood cells with proteins resulting in what is now known as the A and B blood groups, which may have evolved to help protect people from severe infections during pregnancy, now make people more susceptible to arterial and venous thromboembolism.26 Particular variants in our pathogen-recognition genes, which protected us from ancient epidemics, correlate with a range of autoimmune disorders, from diabetes and multiple sclerosis to lupus.27 Whether or not people survive HIV or malaria, or launch an adequate immune response to measles, depends upon their particular pathogen-recognizing HLA genes, which evolved to help ward off the pathogens of the past.
130. The disease historian William McNeill hypothesizes that these highly localized immune behaviors contributed to the development of the caste system in India, in which strict rules limit contact between castes, and there are elaborate rules for purifying the body if contact occurs. These may be the result, in part, of each group having specific immune behaviors tailored to its local pathogens, McNeill speculates, and the resulting need for a system that policed group boundaries.
131. Cross-cultural studies have shown that women find male facial features that are controlled and made more pronounced by the hormone testosterone—broad chins, deep-set eyes, and thin lips—attractive. In general, the more testosterone a male has, the more likely he is to be attractive to women.37 And yet, at the same time, the more testosterone a male has, the less likely it is that he will be a good coparent. Compared to low-testosterone males, high-testosterone males are more likely to engage in antisocial behavior and are less likely to get married. If they do marry, they are more likely to get divorced, have extramarital affairs, and act violently toward their spouses. A high level of testosterone, in that case, should make males less attractive to females. But it’s just the opposite.
132. The microbes that live in human guts influence our risk of developing obesity, depression, and anxiety. They may play a role in controlling our behavior as well. Experimentally ridding mice of their microbes altered their behavior in suggestive ways, reducing both their anxiety responses and ability to perform tasks requiring memory; exposing one mouse to the microbes of another led it to behave in ways that mimic the other.
133. All of which is to say that our vaunted sense of individuality is an illusion. Animals like us, as the evolutionary biologist Nicole King has said, have never been single organisms. For better or worse, we’re “host-microbe ecosystems.” Microbes shape us from without and also from within.43 That is to say, pathogens and pandemics are not solely the products of modern life. They’re part of our biological heritage. The predicament we find ourselves in today, on the threshold of a new pandemic, is hardly exceptional. It’s of a piece with hundreds of millions of years of evolution.
134. nearly half of all deaths in people under the age of forty-five are due to infectious disease.
135. Endemic diseases are arguably much worse than epidemic ones. They are harder to get rid of,
136. But once they stop provoking fear, pathogens have secured the golden ticket. They no longer have to mount our defenses because there’s little public interest in putting up defenses.
137. What we need instead is sustained engagement, with both the formidable threat that pathogens pose and our own critical role in shaping it. That is to say, we need to transcend the simplistic enemy-victor dichotomy and develop a new way of thinking about microbes and our role in the microbial world.
138. the Asian tiger mosquito, which first arrived in the United States in the mid-1980s. Entomologists proposed containing it before it spread but failed to garner sufficient interest. Today, the mosquito carries dengue and other diseases, including new mutant strains of a virus called chikungunya, which established itself in the Americas in 2013.
139. In many countries, even the most rudimentary surveillance is scarce. As of 2013, only 80 of the WHO’s 193 member nations had the surveillance capacity to fulfill their WHO-mandated requirements.
140. Obviously it’s not possible to surveil every microbe with pandemic potential. Nor is it possible to focus in on a few, for there’s no way to know which microbe will cause the next pandemic. But the probability of new pandemic-causing pathogens emerging is not uniform across the globe. There are certain “hot spots” where it’s most likely to happen, places where wild habitat is being invaded in new and accelerated ways, crowded slums are booming, factory farms are growing, and air connections are expanding. By actively surveilling these hot spots—and the “sentinel” populations that interact with them—we can zero in on the places most likely to hatch new pandemic-causing pathogens.
141. Organizations such as HealthMap and Ascel Bio analyze social media and other online sources to do the same.34 These new active surveillance projects have already proved that they can identify outbreaks faster than the traditional passive surveillance system. HealthMap detected the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa nine days before the World Health Organization broke the news. Ascel Bio’s James Wilson detected the outbreak of cholera in Haiti weeks before official reports appeared.
142. In 2012, an active surveillance program founded by the Stanford University virologist Nathan Wolfe uncovered Bas-Congo virus, a novel virus that can cause Ebola-like hemorrhagic fever, in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Earlier efforts by Wolfe, surveilling blood samples collected by bushmeat hunters and wet-market sellers, uncovered several other new microbes, including one called simian foamy virus and another called simian T-lymphotropic virus, both of which have started crossing over into humans.
143. The risk of epidemics could even be predicted the way meteorologists predict the risk of storms. Weather forecasts and satellite data on chlorophyll signatures could help predict outbreaks of malaria, tickborne disease, and cholera.
144. microbial maps. Those maps could help scientists pinpoint microbial signatures that precede outbreaks, too.
145. A tax on air travel of 1 percent could cover the bill.39 A global pandemic insurance fund could disburse the money necessary to respond to these early alarms, the same way that disaster insurance policies pay out when hurricanes and earthquakes strike. The World Bank and the African Union started to discuss establishing such a fund in the spring of 2015.
